Feat/kerchunk (#28)
developmentseed/cloud-optimized-geospatial-formats-guide: kerchunk/intro.qmd

---
title: "Kerchunk"
subtitle: References for Chunked (maybe), Compressed (maybe) N-Dimensional Arrays
---

## What is Kerchunk?

> Kerchunk's potential utility to the geospatial data community cannot be overstated. Kerchunk enables cloud-optimized access to traditional geospatial file formats, like NetCDF, potentially negating the need to create and store copies of data for cloud-optimized access.

Reviewer: ~Kerchunk's potential utility to the geospatial data community cannot be overstated~ maybe make a second sentence or drop.

> Kerchunk creates Zarr metadata, stored in a "reference file", for non-Zarr data. Kerchunk enables a unified way to access chunked, compressed n-dimensionsional data across a variety of conventional data formats. The Kerchunk library now supports NetCDF/HDF5, GRIB2, TIFF.

Reviewer: link to Zarr page

Learn more about Kerchunk at [kerchunk.readthedocs.io](https://kerchunk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

> ## How to Kerchunk 

Reviewer: Where's the How part? I just see an example reference file, nothing about use the `Kerchunk` library/tools to scan an archival format to generate the reference file.

> Kerchunk is a `ReferenceFileSystem` generator. The powerful `fsspec` library provides a uniform file system interface to many different storage backends and protocols. Kerchunk generates data the `fsspec.ReferenceFileSystem` can use to read data.

Reviewer 2: I think I'd swap these sentences to first introduce fsspec and then explain how kerchunk fits into that. Maybe

```suggestion
The powerful [`fsspec` library](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) provides a uniform file system interface to many different storage backends and protocols. In addition to abstracting over existing protocols, its [`ReferenceFileSystem`](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#fsspec.implementations.reference.ReferenceFileSystem) class lets you view byte ranges of some other file as a file system. Kerchunk helps in easily generating these `ReferenceFileSystem` objects.
```

Thoughts?

> The powerful [`fsspec` library](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) provides a uniform file system interface to many different storage backends and protocols. In addition to abstracting over existing protocols, its [`ReferenceFileSystem`](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#fsspec.implementations.reference.ReferenceFileSystem) class lets you view byte ranges of some other file as a file system. Kerchunk helps in easily generating these `ReferenceFileSystem` objects.

Reviewer: fsspec paragraph should be a `note` box.

Kerchunk generates a "reference set" which is a set of references to data or URLs under a key value store that matches the Zarr spec. For example, a simple reference file for a NetCDF file might look like:

```json
{
  ".zgroup": "{\n    \"zarr_format\": 2\n}",
  ".zattrs": "{\n    \"Conventions\": \"UGRID-0.9.0\n\"}",
  "x/.zattrs": "{\n    \"_ARRAY_DIMENSIONS\": [\n        \"node\"\n ...",
  "x/.zarray": "{\n    \"chunks\": [\n        9228245\n    ],\n    \"compressor\": null,\n    \"dtype\": \"<f8\",\n  ...",
  "x/0": ["s3://bucket/path/file.nc", 294094376, 73825960]
}
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `["s3://bucket/path/file.nc", 294094376, 73825960]` is the key part, which says that to load the first chunk in the `x` dimension, the Zarr reader needs to fetch a byte range starting at `294094376` with a length of `73825960` bytes. This allows for efficient cloud-native data access without using the standard NetCDF driver.
```

# Why Kerchunk?

> It is burdensome to create and maintain copies of data. The other pages in this guide introduce data formats which require processing and creating new data products. This process of creating and maintaining new data products which is essentially a copy of existing data requres time, resources, and $$ (specifically for storage but also for processing). Kerchunk provides a method of providing cloud-optimized access to data that is more traditional archival formats.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is burdensome to create and maintain copies of data. The other pages in this guide introduce data formats which require processing and creating new data products. This process of creating and maintaining new data products, which are essentially a copy of existing data, requires time, resources, and $$ (specifically for storage but also for processing). Kerchunk provides a method of providing cloud-optimized access to data that is more traditional archival formats.
```

::: {.callout-warning}

> A major limitation of kerchunk is the chunking of data will always be constrained to the chunk structure of the underlying data format. If the underlying data only stores very large chunks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A major limitation of kerchunk is the chunking of data will always be constrained to the chunk structure of the underlying data format. If the underlying data only stores very large chunks, then the chunks exposed by kerchunk will be similarly large.
```

---
title: "Kerchunk"
subtitle: References for (optionally) chunked, compressed n-dimensional arrays
---

## What is Kerchunk?

> Kerchunk is a python library for creating reference files to support cloud-optimized access to traditional geospatial file formats, like NetCDF. Kerchunk negates the need to create and store copies of data for cloud-optimized access. Given the challenge of creating and maintaining copies of data, Kerchunk is a great tool.

Reviewer: Nobody is going to know what a `reference` file is. explain please - index file called a reference?

::: {.callout-warning}

> A major limitation of kerchunk is the chunking of data will always be constrained to the chunk structure of the underlying data format.

Reviewer: Do we have a page explaining what a Chunk is? people from HDF5 background might not know since only Zarr and Kerchunk really talk about it that way (rasters call them internal tiles)

:::

> Kerchunk creates [zarr](../zarr/intro.qmd) metadata, stored in a "reference file", for non-zarr data. Kerchunk enables a unified way to access chunked, compressed n-dimensionsional data across a variety of conventional data formats. The kerchunk library now supports NetCDF/HDF5, GRIB2, TIFF.

Reviewer: maybe move this up higher to address my concern about `reference file`

Learn more about kerchunk at [kerchunk.readthedocs.io](https://kerchunk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

## How to kerchunk 

> [`kerchunk`](https://fsspec.github.io/kerchunk) is a python library you can use to create a reference file from any of the file formats it supports. At time of writing, Kerchunk can create reference files for NetCDF4/HDF5, GRIB2, FITS, TIFF and NetCDF3. Check the [File format backends](https://fsspec.github.io/kerchunk/reference.html#file-format-backends) section of the kerchunk documentation for updates to supported formats.

Reviewer: Already said this, maybe can remove the duplicate from above.

The reference file is used by the `fsspec.ReferenceFileSystem` to read data from local or remote storage.

> Here's a simple example:

Reviewer: remove the term `simple`, just say `an example` (Data/Software Carpentries best practices)

```python
import fsspec
import json
from kerchunk.hdf import SingleHdf5ToZarr

local_file = 'some_data.nc'
out_file = 'some_references.json'

# Instantiate the local file system with fsspec to save kerchunk's reference data as json.
fs = fsspec.filesystem('')
in_file = fs.open(local_file)

# The inline threshold adjusts the size below which binary blocks are included directly in the output.

> # A higher inline threshold can result in a larger json file but faster loading time.

Reviewer: faster loading time, when doing what? when reading data?

:::

Kerchunk generates a "reference set" which is a set of references to data or URLs under a key value store that matches the Zarr spec. For example, a simple reference file for a NetCDF file might look like:

```json
{
  ".zgroup": "{\n    \"zarr_format\": 2\n}",
  ".zattrs": "{\n    \"Conventions\": \"UGRID-0.9.0\n\"}",
  "x/.zattrs": "{\n    \"_ARRAY_DIMENSIONS\": [\n        \"node\"\n ...",
  "x/.zarray": "{\n    \"chunks\": [\n        9228245\n    ],\n    \"compressor\": null,\n    \"dtype\": \"<f8\",\n  ...",
  "x/0": ["s3://bucket/path/file.nc", 294094376, 73825960]
}
```
The `["s3://bucket/path/file.nc", 294094376, 73825960]` is the key part, which says that to load the first chunk in the `x` dimension, the Zarr reader needs to fetch a byte range starting at `294094376` with a length of `73825960` bytes. This allows for efficient cloud-native data access without using the standard NetCDF driver.

> ## Why Kerchunk?

Reviewer: This should probably be before the reference file example so people get why they care about the rest.
